---
title: A Reexamination of China’s 1982 Constitution from a Rawlsian Perspective
date: 2015-12-13T02:26:30+00:00
layout: post
permalink: /a-reexamination-of-chinas-1982-constitution-from-a-rawlsian-perspective/
---

*This essay was written for Philosophy 2400: Social and Political Philosophy (Autumn 2015) at The Ohio State University.*

<h3 style="text-align: center;"><strong>I</strong></h3>

As we know, the constitutional history of contemporary China is rather complicated. In 1949, the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference adopted a “Common Program” and announced the establishment of the People’s Republic of China. Five years later, in 1954, the first National People's Congress promulgated the Constitution of the People's Republic of China. Following the 1954 Constitution, two more Constitutions were erected within four years, respectively in 1975 and in 1978. Another four years later, the current Constitution was eventually approved in 1982. People are often confused about the relationship between the current Constitution and the three former ones, which have not yet been officially repealed. Even the National People’s Congress was ambiguous about this; it simply announced that “The Constitution of the People's Republic of China is approved by the fifth session of the fifth National People’s Congress on December 4, 2015, and is hereby promulgated.”

If the confusion remains, it is almost impossible for us to understand the power that promulgated the current Constitution, let alone its legitimacy. Here’s one popular explanation. Some scholars have argued that the last three Constitutions, including the current one, should be regarded as complete and comprehensive amendments to the first 1954 Constitution, and the legitimacy of the current Constitution should therefore be traced back to the 1954 Constitution. However, the explanation faces a serious challenge. As Zhongxia Li, a professor at Shandong University Law School points out, “because the 1954 Constitution was approved by the first National People’s Congress, but the National People’s Congress was established by the 1954 Constitution, … the paradox is very clear that the Constitution was approved by an organ of state established by a non-validated Constitution.”

One possible solution to this chicken-and-egg problem might be to trace the current Constitution’s legitimacy further to the Common Program (1949). The story is then reformulated as such: Prior to the establishment of the Common Program and the Central People's Government, a national, common and coercive state power was lacking for a short period of time, very similar to the situation as we find in the state of nature where there is not such a common coercive power. Next, people sat down and had a Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference; they discussed the possibility of a new state and finally agreed on a Common Program, which served as a social contract. Through the Common Program, people decided to erect the new state, and defined its proper ends. In this way, all the four Constitutions that followed are merely extensions of the original contract of 1949.

However, there are two major problems with the solution. According to Hobbes, a traditional social contract theorist, once the social contract is formed, the only thing we ought to do is just to conform to it, even if it turns out to be an unjust contract. Hence, the solution might not be very helpful in regard to contemporary issues in China. In addition, the solution concentrates a lot on the Common Program, the original social contract. This could be problematic in that the Common Program is not effective in practice any more. Although in what follows, I will try to reexamine the current 1982 Constitution from a social contract perspective, in response to the two problems addressed above, I will adopt a contemporary version of the social contract theory introduced by political philosopher John Rawls.

<h3 style="text-align: center;"><strong>II</strong></h3>

One of the most popular criticism of the current Constitution is that the procedure of making the Constitution is not “democratic.” A lot of people believe that deputies of the promulgator, the National People’s Congress, are not elected by the people and hence not representative. People even quote Rousseau from The Social Contract to argue for them: “There is but one law which, from its nature, needs unanimous consent. This is the social compact; for civil association is the most voluntary of all acts.” But even though we should admit that democracy is crucial to contemporary Chinese politics, we have to say sorry to those people that they are misunderstanding Rousseau. Rousseau also says, “If then there are opponents when the social compact is made, their opposition does not invalidate the contract, but merely prevents them from being included in it.” According to him, if you disagree with the social contract, your life will be easier if you get away from here right now; if you prefer to stay here, we cannot but assume that you have no problem with the contract.

I will adopt an alternative way of looking at the current Constitution. Instead of focusing on the procedure of making the Constitution, I will turn to the Constitution itself, i.e. the content of the Constitution. In other words, a fair constitution should build such a state that we would like to live in. I believe this is in some senses the same reason why so many people stick to democracy: Generally speaking, democracy is a reliable tool to secure a free, equal, and dignified life. As the social contract theory suggests, a contract is justifiable if people in the state of nature would consent to it. However, there are two problems which prevent us from thinking in this way. First, it’s not at all easy to enter the state of nature. Since there should be no common, coercive state power in the state of nature, we must either invent a time machine and go back to 1949, or make a public announcement on TV that we do not yield to the state power anymore and get into big trouble with the police. Moreover, even if we have entered the state of nature by using some magical power, our judgments on the social contract may easily be prejudiced. For example, a man would naturally favor a social system which benefits men most; and even if he is feminist, it is more than likely that he would not understand women’s needs and demands as well as women themselves. It follows that a reexamination of the current Constitution from a male perspective might make less sense to women. The same is true for people of different places in society, social status, wealth, talents, strength and so forth. Therefore, even if we went into the state of nature, how would we evaluate the contract appropriately?

The two problems can be solved by the Rawlsian reversion of the social contract theory. In his A Theory of Justice, Rawls has generalized the state of nature and described it further as the original position. For the first problem, what’s different about Rawls’s theory is that as long as we imagine we’re behind a special thing called the veil of ignorance, we are in the original position. For the second problem, the veil of ignorance is able to prevent us from knowing our places in society, social status, wealth, talents, strength and so forth. Since we’re all worried that we might be the least gifted people in society, we would favor a social contract that is more just and fair for everybody. In this way, even if we finally find out that we are, unluckily, the least gifted, we won’t end up living too miserable a life with the help of the more just and fair institutions established by our contract.

According to Rawls, if we’re to regard the current Constitution as justifiable, we must be convinced that people in the original position would accept it. Then, why don’t we just enter the original position and reexamine the current 1982 Constitution by putting ourselves behind the veil of ignorance?

<h3 style="text-align: center;"><strong>III</strong></h3>

Let us first look at the following article from the 1982 Constitution:

The State strengthens the building of a socialist society with an advanced culture and ideology by promoting education in high ideals, ethics, general knowledge, discipline and the legal system, and by promoting the formulation and observance of rules of conduct and common pledges by various sections of the people in urban and rural areas.

<blockquote>
<p style="text-align: left;">The State advocates the civic virtues of love of the motherland, of the people, of labour, of science and of socialism. It conducts education among the people in patriotism and collectivism, in internationalism and communism and in dialectical and historical materialism, to combat capitalist, feudal and other decadent ideas.</p>
<p style="text-align: right;">(Article 24, Constitution of the People's Republic of China)</p>
</blockquote>

We can infer that for some reason, people in the original position adopted a long list of values and doctrines. I will refer to all these by “socialism with Chinese characteristics,” a term used to describe China’s official ideology. What’s unusual about the people’s choice to adopt socialism with Chinese characteristics is that it is an extremely comprehensive doctrine which has something to say about almost everything, from the appropriate economic system to the appropriate end of art, and from the appropriate method of scientific research to the appropriate purposes of media. Why do people in the original position choose to do so? The popular explanation is, only socialism with Chinese characteristics can truly improve Chinese people’s quality of life and keep the nation country prospering. Thus, the case becomes clear: the benefits are social and economic gains; the price is the adoption of a comprehensive doctrine. It does not immediately seem to be a problem, especially when we read these two articles from the 1982 Constitution:

<blockquote>
<p style="text-align: left;">Citizens of the People's Republic of China enjoy freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, of association, of procession and of demonstration.</p>
<p style="text-align: right;">(Article 35, Constitution of the People's Republic of China)</p>
<p style="text-align: left;">Citizens of the People’s Republic of China have the freedom to engage in scientific research, literary and artistic creation and other cultural pursuits….</p>
<p style="text-align: right;">(Article 47, Constitution of the People's Republic of China)</p>
</blockquote>

Now suppose I am going to paint a picture. Socialism with Chinese characters tells me that my painting should serve the people and socialism. Put another way, the people should be the critics of my painting and my painting should most importantly satisfy the people’s demands. This rules out the possibility of doing any challenging art, because the people won’t like to be challenged; it also rules out the possibility of doing most contemporary art, because the people won’t like a painting they can’t understand. Thus, I will have to do some really straightforward, unchallenging, and possible obsequious in order to be a great painter. In this way, a work of “art” cannot be distinguished from an entertaining TV show, or even pornography. We cannot deny that this will become a huge problem for artistic creation. Again, consider these cases: If I would like to give a speech on a social issue, all my ideas should be compatible with socialism with Chinese characters; if I would like to contribute an article to a newspaper, my article should endorse policies made by the Party because newspapers are all mouthpieces of the Party; if my friends and I would like to start a reading club, we have to ensure that we will not read any book that might be harmful to the socialist ideology. In a nutshell, we are free to dance in chains. It is now clear that people in the original position are in fact trading off freedom of thought, by which people are entitled to the liberty of holding their own comprehensive belief about the world, with social and economic benefits.

So, is the trade-off justifiable? This is much more complex than it appears to be. In A Theory of Justice, Rawls claims that people in the original position would agree that “each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive scheme of equal basic liberties compatible with a similar scheme of liberties for others.” Freedom of thought, according to Rawls, belongs to these basic liberties. However, this does not immediately lead to the conclusion that the trade-off is unjust – even Rawls himself might disagree. What Rawls claims to be justice is justice as fairness, which implies that if everyone equally gives up their freedom of thought, such trade-off might be justifiable. However, since freedom of thought is one of the basic liberties, the situation is going to be tricky. It seems as if Rawls is fighting against himself here. Rawls also argues that because basic liberties are so essential, people would agree to grant them extremely high priority so that “The only reason for circumscribing basic liberties and making them less extensive is that otherwise they would interfere with one another.” Let us reframe the case here. People in the original position would agree that they should be equally entitled to the most extensive scheme of equal basic liberties with a similar scheme of liberties for others. The scheme of basic liberties is considered the most extensive when the basic liberties will start to conflict with each other if it’s made more extensive.

Therefore, because the basic liberties are so important for a satisfactory life, people in the original position would not voluntarily, and/or equally, sacrifice any of their basic liberties except under exceptional circumstances. Freedom of thought, as one of the basic liberties, also deserves such importance. Even if it can provide considerably greater social and economic benefits, a state guided by a particular comprehensive doctrine cannot support a satisfactory life for a rational person because it does not allow that person to hold his or her own belief about what is right, what is wrong, and even what a satisfactory life is.

One last comment. Since the social contract is not traditionally included in the Chinese culture, we need to answer this question: How meaningful and persuasive could interpreting the current Constitution in the context of social contract possibly be? I think what matters most is that we are now investigating something fairly familiar but in quite an unfamiliar way, which makes it much easier to notice things we might have ignored otherwise. In addition, a conclusion drawn from a social contract perspective merits consideration, because it’s through serious logical reasoning that we have finally reached that conclusion. In his later work The Idea of an Overlapping Consensus, Rawls argues that “agreement on a single comprehensive doctrine presupposes the oppressive use of state power.” We should at least be alert to the fact that the 1982 constitution explicitly endorses a particular comprehensive doctrine, which turns out to be extremely questionable after a careful examination*.

(A Chinese version can be found <a href="http://mp.weixin.qq.com/s?__biz=MjM5NDM1Nzc1MQ==&amp;mid=400729936&amp;idx=1&amp;sn=a49cd6c5c43799b54aa9663a1ee6dfda">here</a>.)

<span style="color: #808080;"><em>*I would like to thank Professor Shuster for giving me a lot of helpful comments and suggestions on this article, and also Huiwen Zuo, Wenhui Peng, Jingfeng Zhang, Siqi Zhang, Shimeng Zhang and Jingtian Mao for reading earlier drafts, and offering their valuable comments and encouragement.</em></span>
