---
title: Scientists Discover Liquid ‘Water’ on Earth
date: 2017-01-15T22:58:44+00:00
layout: post
permalink: /scientists-discover-liquid-water-earth/
---

*This essay was originally written for Astronomy 1141: Life in the Universe at The Ohio State University.*

Researchers from the Titan Institute for Astronomy, one of the leading astronomical research institutions on Titan, Saturn’s largest moon, have recently discovered liquid ‘water’ on Earth, the third planet from the Sun. However, the researchers note that the ‘water’ on Earth is not the same water that we are familiar with here on Titan. The ‘water’ on Earth is made of H<sub>2</sub>O (what we usually call ‘methane’ on Titan), rather than CH<sub>4</sub> (the standard Titan water), despite increasing consensus in the scientific community that H<sub>2</sub>O might also work as a solvent for biochemical reactions, just like (or even better than) our CH<sub>4</sub>.

With the presence of liquid ‘water,’ the blue planet looks very promising for the search of alien life. According to the researchers, Earth’s oceans, rivers and lakes are literally H<sub>2</sub>O-water (a.k.a. methane) oceans, H<sub>2</sub>O-water rivers and H<sub>2</sub>O-water lakes, and it is very likely, as the researchers envision, that Earth even has a H<sub>2</sub>O-water cycle which functions just like our CH<sub>4</sub>-water cycle. However, it is not decisively clear whether H<sub>2</sub>O-based life is really a possibility, and if there really turns out to be life on Earth, our understanding of conditions for life will be challenged radically.

As we know, liquid H<sub>2</sub>O exists only at 0 to 100 ℃ under the atmospheric conditions on Earth’s surface, which is about 200 to 300 ℃ higher than the surface temperature here on Titan. Currently we do not know very well if life can thrive at such high temperatures, but even if it can, most scientists do not think such life can have complex structures – think about the thermophiles on Titian, all of which are very simple forms of life. In addition, laboratory evidence strongly suggests than liquid H<sub>2</sub>O is a better solvent for the chemistry of life than liquid CH<sub>4</sub>. Some scientists cite this as a strong argument in support of life on Earth, because this makes life activities on Earth much easier to happen, while others strongly disagree by arguing that at such high temperature, chemical reactions take place so quickly that large quantities of substances are needed constantly to retain the reaction rate, and a small number of scientists even fear that the runaway process is highly likely to go out of control, and that it might even result in explosions under extreme circumstances.

Earlier this year, another team of researchers confirmed a radical rise in Earth’s atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> concentration in the last 50 to 100 years. Some scientists suggest that this can be explained by presence of life on Earth. Considering the dramatic amount of the CO<sub>2</sub> added to Earth’s atmosphere, a minority of these scientists even think that it has to be produced by intelligent life – it will be a shocking discovery if there are really aliens deliberately burning fossil fuels on Earth! However, other scientists are more cautious to maintain that life is not the only possible explanation. The increase in Earth’s atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> may also be the result of its Milankovitch cycle (which we do not understand very well at this point), some ongoing volcanic activity, some chemical reactions happening in its atmosphere, or simply a measurement error.

With all that said, although Earth seems to be a promising candidate for alien life, still more needs to be discovered before a conclusion can be drawn. Scientists hope that Curiosity, a rover scheduled to be sent to Earth in 2020 by the Titian Aeronautics and Space Administration (TASA), will bring back the information we are eager to know.
